---


---

<h1 id="project-data-modeling-with-postgres">Project: Data Modeling with Postgres</h1>
<h2 id="introduction">Introduction</h2>
<p>A startup called Sparkify want to analyze the data they have been collecting on songs and user activity on their new music streaming app. The analytics team is particularly interested in understanding what songs users are listening to.</p>
<p>The aim is to create a Postgres Database Schema and ETL pipeline to optimize queries for song play analysis.</p>
<h2 id="song-dataset">Song Dataset</h2>
<p>The first dataset is a subset of real data from the  <a href="https://labrosa.ee.columbia.edu/millionsong/">Million Song Dataset</a>. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song’s track ID. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.</p>
<pre><code>song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json
song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json
</code></pre>
<p>And below is an example of what a single song file, TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json, looks like.</p>
<pre><code>{"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}
</code></pre>
<p>If you would like to look at the JSON data within log_data files, you will need to create a pandas dataframe to read the data. Remember to first import JSON and pandas libraries.</p>
<p><code>df = pd.read_json(filepath, lines=True)</code></p>
<p>For example,  <code>df = pd.read_json('data/log_data/2018/11/2018-11-01-events.json', lines=True)</code>  would read the data file 2018-11-01-events.json.</p>
<h2 id="log-dataset">Log Dataset</h2>
<p>The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this  <a href="https://github.com/Interana/eventsim">event simulator</a>  based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate activity logs from a music streaming app based on specified configurations.</p>
<p>The log files in the dataset you’ll be working with are partitioned by year and month. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.</p>
<pre><code>log_data/2018/11/2018-11-12-events.json
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-13-events.json
</code></pre>
<h2 id="project-description">Project Description</h2>
<p>In this project, I have to model data with Postgres and build and ETL pipeline using Python. On the database side, I have to define fact and dimension tables for a Star Schema for a specific focus. On the other hand, ETL pipeline would transfer data from files located in two local directories into these tables in Postgres using Python and SQL</p>
<h2 id="schema-for-song-play-analysis">Schema for Song Play Analysis</h2>
<p>Using the song and log datasets, you’ll need to create a star schema optimized for queries on song play analysis. This includes the following tables.</p>
<h4 id="fact-table">Fact Table</h4>
<ol>
<li><strong>songplays</strong>  - records in log data associated with song plays i.e. records with page  <code>NextSong</code>
<ul>
<li><em>songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent</em></li>
</ul>
</li>
</ol>
<h4 id="dimension-tables">Dimension Tables</h4>
<ol start="2">
<li><strong>users</strong>  - users in the app
<ul>
<li><em>user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level</em></li>
</ul>
</li>
<li><strong>songs</strong>  - songs in music database
<ul>
<li><em>song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration</em></li>
</ul>
</li>
<li><strong>artists</strong>  - artists in music database
<ul>
<li><em>artist_id, name, location, latitude, longitude</em></li>
</ul>
</li>
<li><strong>time</strong>  - timestamps of records in  <strong>songplays</strong>  broken down into specific units
<ul>
<li><em>start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday</em></li>
</ul>
</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="project-template">Project Template</h2>
<p>To get started with the project, go to the workspace on the next page, where you’ll find the project template files. You can work on your project and submit your work through this workspace. Alternatively, you can download the project template files from the Resources folder if you’d like to develop your project locally.</p>
<p>In addition to the data files, the project workspace includes six files:</p>
<ol>
<li><code>test.ipynb</code>  displays the first few rows of each table to let you check your database.</li>
<li><code>create_tables.py</code>  drops and creates your tables. You run this file to reset your tables before each time you run your ETL scripts.</li>
<li><code>etl.ipynb</code>  reads and processes a single file from  <code>song_data</code>  and  <code>log_data</code>  and loads the data into your tables. This notebook contains detailed instructions on the ETL process for each of the tables.</li>
<li><code>etl.py</code>  reads and processes files from  <code>song_data</code>  and  <code>log_data</code>  and loads them into your tables. You can fill this out based on your work in the ETL notebook.</li>
<li><code>sql_queries.py</code>  contains all your sql queries, and is imported into the last three files above.</li>
<li><code>README.md</code>  provides discussion on your project.</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="project-design">Project Design</h2>
<p>Database Design is very optimized because with a few number of tables and doing specific join, we can get the most information and do analysis</p>
<p>ETL Design is also simplified have to read json files and parse accordingly to store the tables into specific columns and proper formatting.</p>
<h2 id="project-steps">Project Steps</h2>
<p>Below are steps you can follow to complete the project:</p>
<h3 id="create-tables">Create Tables</h3>
<ol>
<li>Write  <code>CREATE</code>  statements in  <code>sql_queries.py</code>  to create each table.</li>
<li>Write  <code>DROP</code>  statements in  <code>sql_queries.py</code>  to drop each table if it exists.</li>
<li>Run  <code>create_tables.py</code>  to create your database and tables.</li>
<li>Run  <code>test.ipynb</code>  to confirm the creation of your tables with the correct columns. Make sure to click “Restart kernel” to close the connection to the database after running this notebook.</li>
</ol>
<h3 id="build-etl-processes">Build ETL Processes</h3>
<p>Follow instructions in the  <code>etl.ipynb</code>  notebook to develop ETL processes for each table. At the end of each table section, or at the end of the notebook, run  <code>test.ipynb</code>  to confirm that records were successfully inserted into each table. Remember to rerun  <code>create_tables.py</code>  to reset your tables before each time you run this notebook.</p>
<h3 id="build-etl-pipeline">Build ETL Pipeline</h3>
<p>Use what you’ve completed in  <code>etl.ipynb</code>  to complete  <code>etl.py</code>, where you’ll process the entire datasets. Remember to run  <code>create_tables.py</code>  before running  <code>etl.py</code>  to reset your tables. Run  <code>test.ipynb</code>  to confirm your records were successfully inserted into each table.</p>
<h2 id="database-script">Database Script</h2>
<p>Writing <code>python create_tables.py</code> command in terminal, it is easier to create and recreate tables</p>
<h2 id="jupyter-notebook">Jupyter Notebook</h2>
<p>etl.ipynb, a Jupyter notebook is given for verifying each command and data as well and then using those statements and copying into <strong><a href="http://etl.py">etl.py</a></strong> and running it into terminal using <code>python etl.py</code> and then running <strong>test.ipynb</strong> to see whether data has been loaded in all the tables</p>
<h2 id="relevant-files-provided">Relevant Files Provided</h2>
<p><strong>test.ipnb</strong> displays the first few rows of each table to let you check your database</p>
<p><strong>create_tables.py</strong> drops and created your table</p>
<p><strong>etl.ipynb</strong> read and processes a single file from song_data and log_data and loads into your tables in Jupyter notebook</p>
<p><strong>etl.ipynb</strong> read and processes a single file from song_data and log_data and loads into your tables in ET</p>
<p><strong>sql_queries.py</strong> containg all your sql queries and in imported into the last three files above</p>
<blockquote>
<p>Written with <a href="https://stackedit.io/">StackEdit</a>.</p>
</blockquote>

